In the last lesson we saw how to write a
simple if statement.
An example that we used was a payroll
example where we perform
one calculation if the number of hours
worked was greater than 40.
And then we had a separate if statement
that checked to see if the number of
hours worked were less than or equal to
40, in which case, yet another calculation
was performed.
Having two if statements related like that
is usually not necessary.
What you can do instead is write what's
called an if-else statement.
And let's take a look at the abstract
version of that, then we'll go
back into the program from last lesson and
then modify it using an if-else.
The way you write the if-else is you have
the if followed by
the relational expression, followed by the
set of statements that will be executed.
Then you have else, followed by a colon,
followed by the set of statements that
you want to have executed, if the if part
of the statement is false.
So, in other words, here's how the if else
statement works.
The relational expression is tested.
If it's true, then the statements in the
body of
the if are executed and control falls
outside of the else.
To where my cursor is, in other words.
If the relational expression is false,
then the statements after the else
are automatically executed and then
control falls down out of the If-Else.
So one set of statements is executed if
the relational expression is true.
A second set of statements is executed if
the relational expression is false.
But by doing it this way, we don't have to
write a
separate if that would be covered in this
case by the else.
Alright, so lets go back and look at the
program from before.
It was ifstatement.py.
And all we have to do to modify that is
take out the if and replace it with an
else.
So, now we're saying, if hour worked is
greater than 40, execute this statement.
Otherwise, else, execute this statement.
So let's exit and save, and then run the
program and see what it does.
So, we'll type if statement.py.
So let's do it where the if is true.
Now let's run it again and this time let's
run it with the else.
So we get the very same result as we got
before, but we do it without
having to actually perform yet a second
relational expression test.
In other words, we don't have to test to
see
if hours worked is less than or equal to
40.
If this expression is false, then
execution is transferred
immediately to the statement inside the
else and it's executed.
So now we've seen two of the three types
of if statements, the if, the if-else
and now the third type which is performed
if we have several relational expressions
to test.
And that's called the if-l-if, and we're
going to
see how to do that in the next lesson.